Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about a man called John Snow.
If you are a fan of the book
or TV series “Game of Thrones”,
I’m sorry to disappoint you.
We’re not talking about that John Snow.
We are, instead, going to talk about the
English doctor and leading epidemiologist,
a man who would forever go down in history
for being the first person to understand
how cholera was transmitted, and in so
doing, by some standards he would be
responsible for saving millions of lives.
It’s a wonderful story, so
let’s get right into it.
To start off our story, I must transport
you to London in the year 1854.
And specifically, to an
area of London called Soho.
You may have visited Soho,
if you’ve been to London.
It’s now full of bars, pubs, and shops,
advertising and marketing companies,
and even English language schools.
But 150 years ago it was
a very different place.
Some streets did contain
beautiful townhouses where wealthy
Londoners lived and worked.
Others did not.
One such street is now called
Broadwick Street, but back then
it was called “Broad Street”.
It was a slum, it was full of
very poor, low quality housing.
If you visited it back then you would
be struck by the smell: rotting food and
rubbish, human and animal waste and the
refuse from butchers, slaughterhouses,
and industry operating in the area.
If you’ve listened to the episode
on The Great Stink, episode number
233, well, you get the picture.
Buildings were hugely overcrowded
with large numbers of people who had
relocated from the countryside, drawn
to the city in the hope of finding work.
Whole families might share
one squalid room, living in
horribly unhygienic conditions.
Most buildings did not have running
water or toilet facilities and the
revolutionary London sewer system
designed by the engineer Joseph
Bazalgette had not yet been built.
As a result, the streets ran with
human sewage, human excrement.
Cesspits - basically huge holes full
of poo - lay beneath the cellars of
buildings throughout the city and
relied on being emptied by the so-called
‘night soil’ collectors who dumped
the contents into the city’s rivers,
primarily into the river Thames.
Wealthy residents sent their waste
via private sewers straight into
the river - despite the fact the
Thames served as a major source
of water for drinking and washing.
The result of all this was that all
of the city’s water sources were full,
literally, of animal and human waste.
And this wasn’t just unpleasant to
see or smell, or nasty to drink.
People were dying of a strange illness
which was given the name “cholera”.
Now, this wasn’t consigned to this
area of London, or even the country.
There are references to cholera that date
back to 1642, and doctors had observed
similar illnesses all over the world,
from India to China, Germany to Egypt.
In 1831 two English doctors wrote about
their experience of the illness in
Russia, describing it in some detail
in The London Gazette newspaper.
Now, this is slightly graphic,
but he is a passage from it.
Read out by a special guest.
Giddiness, sick stomach, nervous
agitation, intermittent, slow, or small
pulse, cramps beginning at the tops of the
fingers and toes, and rapidly approaching
the trunk, give the first warning.
Vomiting or purging, or both these
evacuations of a liquid like rice-water
or whey, or barley-water, come
on; the features become sharp and
contracted, the eye sinks, the look
is expressive of terror and wildness;
The lips, face, neck, hands, and feet,
and soon after the thighs, arms, and whole
surface assume a leaden, blue, purple,
black, or deep brown tint according to the
complexion of the individual, varying in
shade with the intensity of the attack.
The fingers and toes are reduced in size,
the skin and soft parts covering them
are wrinkled, shrivelled and folded.
The nails put on a bluish pearly
white; the larger superficial veins
are marked by flat lines of a deeper
black; the pulse becomes either
small as a thread, and scarcely
vibrating, or else totally extinct…”
Grim stuff indeed, and London too had
experienced a number of cholera epidemics
that killed thousands of people.
And in 1854  the area around
Broad Street was the centre of
a particularly severe outbreak.
In three days over 100 people died
and in the following week most
of the residents fled the area.
By September, over 500 people had died.
But the local authorities, the scientists
and the medical practitioners could not
agree on how cholera was being spread
from person to person and they spent
their time arguing over the relative
merits of their different theories.
One of the most popular was something
called ‘the miasma theory’ which held
that cholera was caused by particles of
‘miasma tar’ given off by decomposing
rubbish and other organic matter.
It was believed that miasma rose from
the ground around the Thames like a
mist and travelled through the air
in London to be inhaled by citizens,
essentially, that it was breathed in.
This theory, combined with the
popular belief that night air was
‘bad air’ and that ventilation after
dark should be avoided, this actually
contributed to the unsanitary conditions
in which most Londoners lived.
It might seem bizarre to us now,
but back then the prevailing medical
advice was to stay inside, in cramped
and poorly ventilated housing so as
to avoid breathing this “night air”
or this cholera-contaminated air.
But there was one man who did not
believe this was the case, one
man who had a different theory.
His observation of the way cholera
spread in certain areas convinced
him that it was not airborne at
all, but spread through water.
His name was John Snow.
And before we get into how he actually
figured this out, I should tell you
a little bit about the man himself,
because his pioneering work and
impact is, in many respects, unlikely.
First of all, Snow was
not originally a Londoner.
Like so many others, he came to the
city, perhaps not to seek his fortune,
but certainly to find his destiny.
He was born in the city of
York in northern England
on the 15th of March 1813.
His parents, William and Frances Snow,
were humble working-class people - his
father, William was a manual labourer
and farmer, and his mother, Frances,
managed the house, looking after
John and his 8 brothers and sisters.
But although this might not sound
like the classic breeding ground for a
world-class epidemiologist, Snow’s early
life was instrumental in shaping his
understanding of how diseases are spread.
The neighbourhood in which the Snow
family lived was in one of the poorer
areas of York and, significantly, it was
subject to flooding from the local river.
This flooding caused unsanitary,
unhygienic, conditions in the houses
of the local residents by contaminating
water with waste from animals, sewers,
industry and even from cemeteries.
Nasty stuff indeed.
Now, John was a very intelligent child
with a great aptitude for mathematics,
a skill that would play an important
role in his work later on in life.
He might not have been thinking about
the spread of disease as a young
boy in York, but his intelligence
meant that he was able to get an
apprenticeship with an apothecary
surgeon, essentially a pharmacist that
also did some basic surgical work.
It was during his time working as
an apprentice that the young John
Snow first encountered cholera in
the nearby village of Killingworth,
where there was a bad outbreak.
There, he helped to treat many
people who were suffering from
cholera, and he became familiar with
its symptoms and deadly effects.
Now, you probably know a
bit about cholera already.
Fortunately, for most of the developed
world it is no longer something
that concerns us, but let me quickly
remind you about what exactly it is
and what it does, in slightly less
graphic terms than the account from
the newspaper you heard earlier.
Cholera is an infection of the
small intestine by a bacteria called
vibrio-cholera and is one of the most
serious diseases that affects humans.
Its symptoms are wide-ranging but one
of the most significant is extreme
diarrhoea that can last for days.
This can be so severe as to cause
dangerous levels of dehydration
through the huge loss of body fluids
in a very short period of time.
And if not treated
properly, it will kill you.
Over the last 200 years there have
been seven major cholera pandemics
and millions of consequent deaths.
The epidemic that John Snow encountered
in Killingworth in the 1830s was part of
the second major pandemic, one that began
around 1826 in India and spread across
China, Japan and Western Asia then to
Europe, the Americas and Great Britain.
Hundreds of thousands of people died.
And this brings us back to Soho in 1854.
On one side we have physicians debating
exactly how this bad air is spreading
cholera, but with no viable solution,
no idea about how to stop transmission.
On the other we have John Snow, who
by this time has his own private
practice in Frith Street, a few
streets away from Broad Street,
the centre of the cholera outbreak.
As a reminder, he thought cholera
was transmitted through infected
water, not through bad air.
So, how had he come to this hypothesis?
Well, his studies showed that
the transmission of the disease
depended on where the water in a
particular neighbourhood came from.
Two of the main companies that
provided water to central London
drew it from polluted places, others
got it from cleaner sources and
filtered it to remove contaminants.
The areas the latter served had
measurably fewer deaths, no matter
whether the inhabitants were rich
or poor, male or female, young
or old, or what job they did.
After the Broad Street outbreak, John Snow
decided to chart, to map, the incidents of
cholera by interviewing local residents.
He plotted the incidents of cholera
on a map, and in so doing he was
able to establish a pattern for
the spread of the disease and he
noticed something highly significant.
“Within 250 yards of the spot where
Cambridge Street joins Broad Street
there were upwards of 500 fatal attacks
of cholera in 10 days… As soon as I
became acquainted with the situation
and extent of this eruption of cholera,
I suspected some contamination of
the water of the much-frequented
street-pump in Broad Street.”
Thank you John.
Significantly, there were only 10 deaths
in houses nearer to a different pump, and
in five of those cases, the families of
the deceased, the dead people, told Snow
that they always used the pump in Broad
Street, as they preferred its water.
They preferred it despite the fact it was
later discovered that the well beneath
the pump had been dug near to an old
cesspit that was leaking human waste!
Tasty stuff indeed.
In three other cases, the victims were
children who went to school near the
pump in Broad Street, so Snow presumed
that they stopped off at that pump for
a drink on their way to or from school.
He went on to map the locations of
cholera incidents near various other
pumps and used his mathematical
knowledge to illustrate the connection
between the quality of the water
source and the number of cases.
Areas supplied with water from a
sewage-polluted stretch of the Thames
had a cholera rate fourteen times higher
than that supplied from a cleaner area.
Now, this might sound blindingly
obvious to us now, “don’t drink
polluted water”, but I need to stress
that it wasn’t obvious at the time.
After showing his calculations to
the local authorities, he managed to
convince them to test his theory and
stop the use of the Broad Street pump by
removing its handle, making it unusable.
He didn’t win many friends for this,
it wasn’t a popular move, as it meant
that everyone around Broad Street needed
to walk to the next pump to get water.
But it seemed to work.
Cholera deaths reduced, the outbreak
ended, although Snow would himself later
write that deaths had already peaked.
And although today we know that cholera
is indeed carried in contaminated
water, and you might have thought that
this was definitive proof, it would
take several years for Snow’s theory
to actually be definitely proved.
This wouldn’t be until 1861,
when the Frenchman Louis Pasteur
developed his ‘germ theory’ for the
transmission of diseases, and with
this the miasma theory was dismissed.
And indeed Snow’s theory wasn’t fully
accepted until five years after this,
in 1866, when one of his original
opponents, who was investigating another
cholera outbreak in East London, realised
its truth and issued orders that all
drinking water must be boiled first.
Sadly by that time, Snow was dead.
He suffered a stroke whilst at work on
the 10th of June 1858 at the tragically
young age of 45 and he never recovered.
If you go to London today, you can
visit all of the places I’ve mentioned:
Frith Street, where he had his private
practice, and Broadwick Street,
where there was the cholera outbreak.
And if you go to Broadwick Street you
will see two signs of this great man.
The first is obvious, it’s
a pub called the John Snow.
Although I’m not sure what John Snow
would have thought about a pub being
named after him as he was teetotal, he
didn’t drink alcohol, and drank pure
boiled water for his entire adult life.
And the second is less obvious, it’s
a replica pump, a pump made to look
like the very pump John Snow figured
was the source of the cholera outbreak.
So, if you do find yourself in this
area of London, go to Broadwick
Street, take a look at the pump, and
remember the story of this great man.
You can even pop into the pub
and have a pint in his memory.
Or, if you want to really honour him,
I’d recommend ordering his favourite
drink: a glass of pure boiled water.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on John Snow, the famous epidemiologist.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
that you've learnt something new, and
that this gives you yet another place of
interest to visit if you go to London.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Did you know anything about this story?
Have you been to Soho, have
you even stopped off for a
drink in The John Snow pub?
What other interesting stories are
there of how diseases were discovered?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.